

Carl Sagan dispensa apresentações. Sempre achei este trecho inspirador. É bom dar a motivação certa às pessoas e outra razão de porque recomendo Cosmos a todas as crianças: um legado que ultrapassa gerações. (Mais vídeos recomendados no final do artigo.)


Este trecho de Um Pálido Ponto Azul foi inspirado por uma imagem tirada, à sugestão de Sagan, pela Voyager I em 14 de Fevereiro de 1990. À medida que a espaçonave deixava nossa vizinhança planetária para as bordas do sistema solar, engenheiros a viraram para uma última olhada ao nosso planeta. A Voyager I estava a cerca de 6.4 bilhões de quilômetros de distância, e aproximadamente 32 graus acima do plano elíptico, quando capturou este retrato de nosso mundo. Pego no centro de raios de luz difusas (um resultado de tirar a foto tão próximo do Sol), a Terra parece um pequeno ponto de luz, um crescente de apenas 0.12 pixels de tamanho.
(AkitaOnRails: a seguir segue o texto original em inglês. A tradução está no vídeo acima.)

por Carl Sagan 
Co-fundador da Sociedade Planetária  
1994
Look again at that dot. That’s here. That’s home. That’s us. On it everyone you love, everyone you know, everyone you ever heard of, every human being who ever was, lived out their lives. The aggregate of our joy and suffering, thousands of confident religions, ideologies, and economic doctrines, every hunter and forager, every hero and coward, every creator and destroyer of civilization, every king and peasant, every young couple in love, every mother and father, hopeful child, inventor and explorer, every teacher of morals, every corrupt politician, every “superstar,” every “supreme leader,” every saint and sinner in the history of our species lived there—on a mote of dust suspended in a sunbeam.
The Earth is a very small stage in a vast cosmic arena. Think of the rivers of blood spilled by all those generals and emperors so that, in glory and triumph, they could become the momentary masters of a fraction of a dot. Think of the endless cruelties visited by the inhabitants of one corner of this pixel on the scarcely distinguishable inhabitants of some other corner, how frequent their misunderstandings, how eager they are to kill one another, how fervent their hatreds.
Our posturings, our imagined self-importance, the delusion that we have some privileged position in the Universe, are challenged by this point of pale light. Our planet is a lonely speck in the great enveloping cosmic dark. In our obscurity, in all this vastness, there is no hint that help will come from elsewhere to save us from ourselves.
The Earth is the only world known so far to harbor life. There is nowhere else, at least in the near future, to which our species could migrate. Visit, yes. Settle, not yet. Like it or not, for the moment the Earth is where we make our stand.
It has been said that astronomy is a humbling and character-building experience. There is perhaps no better demonstration of the folly of human conceits than this distant image of our tiny world. To me, it underscores our responsibility to deal more kindly with one another, and to preserve and cherish the pale blue dot, the only home we’ve ever known.
Carl Sagan, Pale Blue Dot, 1994
How to explain the Origins of the Universe …

Why we need to motivate scientific research …

Why religious fanaticism is dangerous for mankind …

And, let us never forget Sagan’s legacy …
tags: off-topic science

