

If you didn't register yet, don't miss this opportunity. Go to the official website to register as soon as possible. The conference will commence on August 29th.
This is the 6th consecutive year that Locaweb and myself are organizing yet another great Rubyconf in Brazil. Several great established companies and tech startup are supporting the conference sending great developers.
Meet Vivid Cortex a MySQL monitoring and analysis tools as a service. They just raised $2M to further improve their technology. Pablo Astigarraga is coming to speak at the event, more specifically about a subject that most people think they know but they actually don't: the classic Model-View-Controller (MVC) design pattern.
Don't miss his talk precisely at 1:15PM of the first day of the event. Let's get to know more about him:



"Your talk is about the MVC pattern and it's history, an important concept to be mastered by every Ruby on Rails or even Javascript programmer. If someone is just beginning with Ruby, can you explain what some of the requirements are to understand what you're going to talk about?"
Pablo: My talk is much more about the design pattern itself than about the particular implementation of Rails, so while having basic familiarity with Rails or any other MVC framework will probably be helpful but you don't really need it in order to follow the talk. The aim of the talk itself is to give some insight on how this particular design pattern has developed over the years and what are the problems it solves well and the problems that we aren't quite certain of how to approach yet, so hopefully it should add to whomever does software on the web these days.
"Many developers would love to become as experienced and fluent in Ruby as you are. What have been some of the pitfalls you had to overcome in order to become a great developer? Any good tips for a Ruby beginner?"
Pablo: Good question. I think the only real pitfall in the way of becoming a good developer is complacence. If we as developers keep an open mind and remember to always be playful, passionate and informed about our craft we'll become good at it, the scary thought is that in order to keep being good developers we need to never stop learning stuff, but that's kind of awesome, too.
In the end the only things we need are practice and willingness. :)
"There are so many new technologies, best practices and so on being released all the time. In your personal opinion, and maybe related to your current field of work, what are some of the trends in technology that you think we should be paying attention for the near future?"
Pablo: Hum, I think the platform as a service world is becoming super interesting. Sure: Heroku paved the way a few years ago by being all magical about their deploys, but now that they've open sourced their buildpack tool Docker it's super easy to set up your own PaaS with projects like Dokku, I have this on my own VPS and I am able to deploy Ruby (and many more) apps with zero configuration simply by doing a git push to it, this is the future for all deploys, I think, and I love it.

tags: rubyconfbr2013 english

